# RNA Sequencing Data Analysis: A 2025 Review and Updated Snakemake Pipeline

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Objectives](#objectives)
- [Workflow](#workflow)
  - [Preprocessing](#Preprocessing)
  - [Indexing](#Indexing)
  - [Alignment](#Alignment)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [References](#references)
---

## Introduction

This project aims to provide an easy-to-use Snakemake pipeline, ensuring that it is ready to run "out-of-the-box" in 2025. The pipeline was developed by replicating the RNA-seq data analysis steps outlined in the original work by Clarissa M. Koch and colleagues [^1], whose well-structured article inspired this effort. I aim to assess whether the methods, tools, and approaches described in their paper are still relevant and effective in 2025, while making the process more accessible to users.

## Objectives

- **Replicate the original analysis:** Recreate the RNA-seq data analysis pipeline outlined by Koch et al. and evaluate whether the tools and methods used in 2018 are still valid in 2025.
- **Compare with other publications:** In addition to replicating the original work, compare their methods and tools with those used in other recent publications.
- **Provide an updated Snakemake pipeline:** Develop a fully automated and easy-to-use Snakemake workflow to run the entire analysis from raw data to final results with minimal setup.
- **Ensure modern compatibility:** Ensure that the pipeline uses up-to-date tools and methods that are efficient and well-supported in 2025, replacing deprecated tools where necessary.
---
## Workflow

### Preprocessing

  - **PreAlignment-QC:**

    - **FastQC** [^3]

    Highlights any areas where reads look unusual and requires a closer look.
    ```    
    - The program is not tied to any specific type of sequencing technique and
    can be used to look at libraries coming from a large number of different
    experiment types (Genomic Sequencing, ChIP-Seq, RNA-Seq, BS-Seq etc etc).
    ```
    - **MultiQC** [^4]

    MultiQC is the standard in bioinformatics reporting
    ```
    - a tool to create a single report with interactive plots for
    multiple bioinformatics analyses across many samples.
    Reports are generated by scanning given directories for recognised files.
    ```
  
  - **Trimming - Filtering:**

    - **Trimmomatic**
    - **Fastp**

  - **Indexing**

    - **Bowtie2:**

  - **Alignment**

    - **TopHat2** [^2]

    TopHat2 produces number of files in its tophat_out/ output directory. Some of the generated files are:
    ```
    accepted_hits.bam: list of read alignments in BAM format.

    unmapped.bam: list of unmapped reads in BAM format.

    junctions.bed: BED track of reported junctions.

    insertions.bed: BED track of insertions reported by TopHat.

    deletions.bed: BED track of deletions reported by TopHat.

    prep_reads.info:
    - statistics about the input sequencing data (min/max read length, number of reads).

    align_summary.txt:
    - summary of the alignment counts (number of mapped reads, overall read mapping rate).
    ```

## References
[^1]: Koch CM, Chiu SF, Akbarpour M, Bharat A, Ridge KM, Bartom ET, Winter DR. A Beginner's Guide to Analysis of RNA Sequencing Data. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2018 Aug;59(2):145-157. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2017-0430TR. PMID: 29624415; PMCID: PMC6096346.
[^2]: Kim, D., Pertea, G., Trapnell, C., Pimentel, H., Kelley, R., & Salzberg, S. L. (2013). TopHat2: Accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the presence of insertions, deletions and gene fusions. Genome Biology, 14(4), R36. https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2013-14-4-r36
[^3]: Andrews, Simon. Year. FastQC: A Quality Control Tool for High Throughput Sequence Data. Version [0.12.1]. GitHub. https://github.com/s-andrews/FastQC.
[^4]: Ewels, Philip, Måns Magnusson, Sverker Lundin, and Max Käller. 2016. "MultiQC: Summarize Analysis Results for Multiple Tools and Samples in a Single Report." Bioinformatics. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw354.
